Blog post gui challenge split button (#6012)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/building-a-split-button-component/index.md

that conceal a primary button and a list of additional buttons. They're useful
for exposing a common action while nesting secondary, less frequently used
actions until needed. A split button can be crucial to helping a busy design
feel minimal. An advanced split button may even remember the last user action
and promote it into the primary position.

A common split button can be found in your email application. The primary action
is send, but perhaps you can send later or save a draft instead:

{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/7D9MI9GmPhYAtFs83DDI.png",
alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="517", class="w-screenshot" %}

The shared action area is nice, since the user doesn't need to look around. They
know that essential email actions are contained in the split button.

### Parts

Let's break down the essential parts of a split button before discussing their
overall orchestration and final user experience.
[VisBug](https://github.com/GoogleChromeLabs/ProjectVisBug)'s accessibility
inspect tool is used here to help show a macro view of the component, surfacing
aspects of the HTML, style and accessibility for each major part.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/URCIaZV3gyMvTiMjRYmK.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="581", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/URCIaZV3gyMvTiMjRYmK.png",
alt="The HTML elements that make up the split button.", width="800", height="581", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

#### Top level split button container

The highest level component is an inline flexbox, with a class of
`gui-split-button`, containing the [primary action](#the-primary-action-button)
and the [`.gui-popup-button`](#the-popup-toggle-button).

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/SLjXwBPvsrEXBb1vcm6L.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="581", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/SLjXwBPvsrEXBb1vcm6L.png",
alt="The gui-split-button class inspected and showing the CSS properties used in this class.", width="800", height="581", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

#### The primary action button

The initially visible and focusable `<button>` fits within the container with
two matching corner shapes for
[focus](https://web.dev/learn/css/pseudo-classes/#:focus-:focus-within-and-:focus-visible),
[hover](https://web.dev/learn/css/pseudo-classes/#:hover) and
[active](https://web.dev/learn/css/pseudo-classes/#:active) interactions to
appear contained within `.gui-split-button`.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/69gvxF4AfQoNki4pBtVb.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="644", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/69gvxF4AfQoNki4pBtVb.png",
alt="The inspector showing the CSS rules for <button>.", width="800", height="644", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

#### The popup toggle button

The "popup button" support element is for activating and alluding to the list of
secondary buttons. Notice it's not a `<button>` and it's not focusable. However,
it is the positioning anchor for [`.gui-popup`](#the-popup-card) and host for `:focus-within` used
to present the popup.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/p2R7pHvID9XR9JoHHzth.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="490", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/p2R7pHvID9XR9JoHHzth.png",
alt="The inspector showing the CSS rules for the class gui-popup-button.", width="800", height="490", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

#### The popup card

This is a floating card child to its anchor
[`.gui-popup-button`](#the-popup-toggle-button), positioned absolute and
semantically wrapping the button list. 

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/LSeLIFhe7yuG9QoR1VM9.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="629", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/LSeLIFhe7yuG9QoR1VM9.png",
alt="The inspector showing the CSS rules for the class gui-popup", width="800", height="629", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

#### The secondary action(s)

A focusable `<button>` with a slightly smaller font size than the [primary
action button](#the-primary-action-button) features an icon and a complimentary
style to the primary button.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/5GBSno8pMaNVRZJT7yxd.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="679", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/5GBSno8pMaNVRZJT7yxd.png",
alt="The inspector showing the CSS rules for <button>.", width="800", height="679", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

        </svg>
        Schedule for later
      </button></li>
      <li><button>
        <svg aria-hidden="true" viewBox="0 0 24 24">
          <path d="M19 7l-.867 12.142A2 2 0 0116.138 21H7.862a2 2 0 01-1.995-1.858L5 7m5 4v6m4-6v6m1-10V4a1 1 0 00-1-1h-4a1 1 0 00-1 1v3M4 7h16" />
        </svg>
        Delete
      </button></li>
      <li><button>
        <svg aria-hidden="true" viewBox="0 0 24 24">
          <path d="M5 5a2 2 0 012-2h10a2 2 0 012 2v16l-7-3.5L5 21V5z" />
        </svg>
        Save draft
      </button></li>
    </ul>
  </span>
</div>
```

### Styles

With HTML and content in place, styles are ready to provide color and layout.

#### Styling the split button container

An `inline-flex` display type works well for this wrapping component as it
should fit inline with other split buttons, actions or elements. 

```css
.gui-split-button {
  display: inline-flex;
  border-radius: var(--radius);
  background: var(--theme);
  color: var(--ontheme);
  fill: var(--ontheme);

  touch-action: manipulation;
  user-select: none;
  -webkit-tap-highlight-color: transparent;
}
```

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/a55qj9gU1qmoTlnbQvDe.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="241", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/a55qj9gU1qmoTlnbQvDe.png",
alt="The split button.", width="800", height="241", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

> #### Styling the `<button>`s

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### The `<button>` styling
```

> Buttons are very good at disguising how much code it takes. You might need to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Buttons are very good at disguising how much code is required. You might need to
```

not, it'll apply for any focus. 

The video below attempts to break this microinteraction down, to show how
`:focus-visible` is an intelligent alternative.

{% Video 
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/D2AqjpvafPAPB3CMXkhd.mp4",
  class="w-screenshot",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true" 
%}

#### Generic `<svg>` icon styles

All icons are relatively sized to the button `font-size` they're used within by
using the [`ch`](https://web.dev/learn/css/sizing/#relative-lengths) unit as the
`inline-size`. Each is also given some styles to help outline icons soft and
smooth.

```css
.gui-split-button svg {
  inline-size: 2ch;
  box-sizing: content-box;
  stroke-linecap: round;
  stroke-linejoin: round;
  stroke-width: 2px;
}
```

{% Video 
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/2vJRCeIhxVitT79q78RR.mp4",
  class="w-screenshot",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true"
%}

#### Styling the popup button

A `4ch` flexbox for centering an icon and anchoring a popup button list. Like
the primary button, it is transparent until otherwise hovered or interacted
with, and stretched to fill.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/fiSlBJyM8x52b5msQBUY.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="800", height="241", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/fiSlBJyM8x52b5msQBUY.png",
alt="The arrow part of the split button used to trigger the popup.", width="800", height="241", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

}
```

With the in and out styles complete, the last piece is to **conditionally
transition transforms** depending on the user's motion preference:

```css
.gui-popup-button {
  …

  @media (--motionOK) {
    & > svg {
      transition: transform var(--out-speed) ease;
    }
    & > .gui-popup {
      transform: translateY(5px);

      transition: 
        opacity var(--out-speed) ease,
        transform var(--out-speed) ease;
    }
  }
}
```

A keen eye on the code would notice **opacity is still transitioned** for users
who prefer reduced motion. 

{% Video 
  src="video/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/bsOaOSHe8ZZl0vnZAtmr.mp4",
  class="w-screenshot",
  autoplay="true",
  loop="true",
  muted="true"
%}

{% Aside "caution" %}
Reduced motion doesn't mean no motion.
{% endAside %}

#### Styling the popup

The `.gui-popup` element is a floating card button list using custom properties
and relative units to be subtly smaller, interactively matched with the primary
button, and on brand with its use of color. Notice the icons have less contrast,
are thinner, and the shadow has a hint of brand blue to it. Like with buttons,
strong UI/UX is a result of these little details stacking up.

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/D7RWfwJW25G3kuzPSnlz.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="448", height="422", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/D7RWfwJW25G3kuzPSnlz.png",
alt="A floating card element.", width="448", height="422", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

Reviewer: Is this image right? Above you are talking about the icons, this image is just the card.

Author: the image is right, but i agree, the flow feels off. I can move the svg styles to after the popup is done, it's def refinement work that's a bit early in the post. i'll make a commit that order this the svg and popup better thanks!

```css
.gui-popup {
  --shadow: 220 70% 15%;
  --shadow-strength: 1%;

  opacity: 0;
  pointer-events: none;

  position: absolute;
  bottom: 80%;
  left: -1.5ch;
  
  list-style-type: none;
  background: var(--popupbg);
  color: var(--theme-text);
  padding-inline: 0;
  padding-block: .5ch;
  border-radius: var(--radius);
  overflow: hidden;
  display: flex;
  flex-direction: column;
  font-size: .9em;
  transition: opacity var(--out-speed) ease;

  box-shadow:
    0 -2px 5px 0 hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 5%)),
    0 1px 1px -2px hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 10%)),
    0 2px 2px -2px hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 12%)),
    0 5px 5px -2px hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 13%)),
    0 9px 9px -2px hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 14%)),
    0 16px 16px -2px hsl(var(--shadow) / calc(var(--shadow-strength) + 20%))
  ;
}
```

The icons and buttons are given brand colors to style nicely within each dark
and light themed card:

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/ddCiS1PqDtjDRESUG4U1.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="452", height="422", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/ddCiS1PqDtjDRESUG4U1.png",
alt="Links and icons for checkout, Quick Pay, and Save for later.", width="452", height="422", class="w-screenshot" %}
```

```css
.gui-popup {
  …

  & svg {
    fill: var(--popupbg);
    stroke: var(--theme);

    @media (prefers-color-scheme: dark) {
      stroke: var(--theme-border);
    }
  }

  & button {
    color: var(--theme-text);
    width: 100%;
  }
}
```

The dark theme popup has text and icon shadow additions, plus a slightly more
intense box shadow:

> {% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/4vOdW4OD1i4uNRQdTWH5.png",
> alt="ALT_TEXT_HERE", width="434", height="412", class="w-screenshot" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/vS06HQ1YTsbMKSFTIPl2iogUQP73/4vOdW4OD1i4uNRQdTWH5.png",
alt="The popup in the dark theme.", width="434", height="412", class="w-screenshot" %}
```
